# Introduction to the HTTP

HTTP is the protocol that every web developer should know, as it powers the entire web.

---

## Heads-up Resources and URIs

#### Identfying resources on the Web

The target of an HTTP request is called a "resource", whose nature isn't defined further; it can be a document, a photo, or anything else. Each resource is identified by a Uniform Resource Identifier ([URI](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/URI)) used throughout HTTP for identifying resources.

###### URLs and URNs

**URL** => The most common form of URI is the Uniform Resource Locator ([URL](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/URL)), which is known as the *web address*.

```http
https://developer.mozilla.org
https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/
https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/search?q=U
http://www.example.com:80/path/to/myfile.html?key1=value1&key2=value2#SomewhereInTheDocumentRL
```

**URN** => A Uniform Resource Name (URN) is a URI that identifies a resource by name in a particular namespace.

```http
urn:isbn:9780141036144
urn:ietf:rfc:7230
```

###### Syntax of Uniform

`http://` is the protocol. It indicates which protocol the browser must use. Usually it is the HTTP protocol or its secured version, HTTPS. The Web requires one of these two, but browsers also know how to handle other protocols such as `mailto:` (to open a mail client) or `ftp:` to handle a file transfer, so don't be surprised if you see such protocols. Common schemes are:

| Scheme      | Description                  |
| ----------- | ---------------------------- |
| data        | Data URLs                    |
| file        | Host-specific file names     |
| ftp         | File Transfer Protocol       |
| http/https  | Hyper text transfer protocol |
| javascript  | URL-embedded JavaScript code |
| mailto      | Electronic mail address      |
| ssh         | Secure shell                 |
| tel         | telephone                    |
| urn         | Uniform Resource Names       |
| view-source | Source code of the resource  |
| ws/wss      | WebSocket connections        |

> **Authority**
> 
> tp://`www.example.com`:80/path/to/...
> 
> `www.example.com` is the domain name or authority that governs the namespace. It indicates which Web server is being requested. Alternatively, it is possible to directly use an [IP address](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/IP_Address), but because it is less convenient, it is not often used on the Web.
> 
> **Port**
> 
> tp://www.example.com`:80`/path/to/...
> 
> `:80` is the port in this instance. It indicates the technical "gate" used to access the resources on the web server. It is usually omitted if the web server uses the standard ports of the HTTP protocol (80 for HTTP and 443 for HTTPS) to grant access to its resources. Otherwise, it is mandatory.
> 
> **Path**
> 
> ...:80/`path/to/myfile.html`?key1=...
> 
> `/path/to/myfile.html` is the path to the resource on the Web server. In the early days of the Web, a path like this represented a physical file location on the Web server. Nowadays, it is mostly an abstraction handled by Web servers without any physical reality.
> 
> **Query**
> 
> ...`?key1=value1&key2=value2`#Some...
> 
> `?key1=value1&key2=value2` are extra parameters provided to the Web server. Those parameters are a list of key/value pairs separated with the `&` symbol. The Web server can use those parameters to do extra stuff before returning the resource to the user.
> 
> **Fragment**
> 
> ...#SomewhereInTheDocument
> 
> `#SomewhereInTheDocument` is an anchor to another part of the resource itself. An anchor represents a sort of "bookmark" inside the resource, giving the browser the directions to show the content located at that "bookmarked" spot. On an HTML document, for example, the browser will scroll to the point where the anchor is defined; on a video or audio document, the browser will try to go to the time the anchor represents. It is worth noting that the part after the #, also known as the fragment identifier, *is never sent to the server with the request.*

#### Data URLs

**Data URLs**, URLs prefixed with the `data:` scheme, allow content creators to embed small files inline in documents. They were formerly known as "data URIs" until that name was retired by the WHATWG.

###### Syntax

Data URLs are composed of four parts: a prefix (`data:`), a [MIME type](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Basics_of_HTTP/MIME_types) indicating the type of data, an optional `base64` token if non-textual, and the data itself:

```
data:[<mediatype>][;base64],<data>
```

The `mediatype` is a [MIME type](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Basics_of_HTTP/MIME_types) string, such as `'image/jpeg'` for a JPEG image file. If omitted, defaults to `text/plain;charset=US-ASCII`

#### Introduction to MIME types

A **media type** (also known as a **Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions or MIME type**) indicates the nature and format of a document, file, or assortment of bytes. MIME types are defined and standardized in IETF's [RFC 6838](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6838).

#### Common MIME types

#### Choosing between www and non-www URLs

---

## What is the HTTP?

HTTP is a TCP/IP-based application layer communication protocol that standardizes how clients and servers communicate with each other. It defines how content is requested and transmitted across the internet. By application layer protocol, I mean that it's simply an abstraction layer that standardizes how hosts (clients and servers) communicate. HTTP itself depends on TCP/IP to get requests and responses between the client and server. By default, TCP port 80 is used, but other ports can also be used. HTTPS, however, uses port 443.

HTTP is an extensible protocol that relies on concepts like resources and Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs), simple message structure, and client-server communication flow. On top of these basic concepts, numerous extensions have been developed over the years that add updated functionality and semantics with new HTTP methods or headers.

#### An Overview of HTTP

**HTTP** is a [protocol](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Protocol) for fetching resources such as HTML documents. It is the foundation of any data exchange on the Web and it is a client-server protocol, which means requests are initiated by the recipient, usually the Web browser. A complete document is reconstructed from the different sub-documents fetched, for instance, text, layout description, images, videos, scripts, and more.

Clients and servers communicate by exchanging individual messages (as opposed to a stream of data). The messages sent by the client, usually a Web browser, are called *requests* and the messages sent by the server as an answer are called *responses*.

Designed in the early 1990s, HTTP is an extensible protocol which has evolved over time. It is an application layer protocol that is sent over [TCP](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/TCP), or over a [TLS](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/TLS)-encrypted TCP connection, though any reliable transport protocol could theoretically be used. Due to its extensibility, it is used to not only fetch hypertext documents, but also images and videos or to post content to servers, like with HTML form results. HTTP can also be used to fetch parts of documents to update Web pages on demand.

#### Evolution of HTTP

###### HTTP/0.9 - The One Liner(1991)

It was the simplest protocol ever; having a single method called GET.

```http
Request
GET /index.html


Response
(response body)
(connection closed)
```

That is, the server would get the request, reply with the HTML in response and as soon as the content has been transferred, the connection will be closed. There were:

- No headers

- `GET` was the only allowed method

- Response had to be HTML

###### HTTP/1.0 - 1996

HTTP/1.0 could now deal with other response formats i.e. images, video files, plain text or any other content type as well. It added more methods (i.e. POST and HEAD), request/response formats got changed, HTTP headers got added to both the request and responses, status codes were added to identify the response, character set support was introduced, multi-part types, authorization, caching, content encoding and more was included.

```http
GET / HTTP/1.0
Host: cs.fyi
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_10_5)
Accept: */*
```

```http
Response
HTTP/1.0 200 OK 
Content-Type: text/plain
Content-Length: 137582
Expires: Thu, 05 Dec 1997 16:00:00 GMT
Last-Modified: Wed, 5 August 1996 15:55:28 GMT
Server: Apache 0.84

(response body)
(connection closed)
```

One of the major drawbacks of HTTP/1.0 were you couldn't have multiple requests per connection. That is, whenever a client will need something from the server, it will have to open a new TCP connection and after that single request has been fulfilled, connection will be closed. And for any next requirement, it will have to be on a new connection. Why is it bad? Well, let's assume that you visit a webpage having 10 images, 5 stylesheets and 5 javascript files, totalling to 20 items that needs to fetched when request to that webpage is made. Since the server closes the connection as soon as the request has been fulfilled, there will be a series of 20 separate connections where each of the items will be served one by one on their separate connections. This large number of connections results in a serious performance hit as requiring a new TCP connection imposes a significant performance penalty because of three-way handshake followed by slow-start.

**Three-way Handshake**

Three-way handshake in it's simples form is that all the TCP connections begin with a three-way handshake in which the client and the server share a series of packets before starting to share the application data.

###### HTTP/1.1 - 1997

The major improvements over HTTP/1.0 included:

- New HTTP methods were added, which introduced PUT, PATCH, OPTIONS, DELETE

- Hostname Identification In HTTP/1.0 Host header wasn't required but HTTP/1.1 made it required.

- Persistent Connections As discussed above, in HTTP/1.0 there was only one request per connection and the connection was closed as soon as the request was fulfilled which resulted in accute performance hit and latency problems. HTTP/1.1 introduced the persistent connections i.e. connections weren't closed by default and were kept open which allowed multiple sequential requests. To close the connections, the header Connection: close had to be available on the request. Clients usually send this header in the last request to safely close the connection.

- Pipelining It also introduced the support for pipelining, where the client could send multiple requests to the server without waiting for the response from server on the same connection and server had to send the response in the same sequence in which requests were received. But how does the client know that this is the point where first response download completes and the content for next response starts, you may ask! Well, to solve this, there must be Content-Length header present which clients can use to identify where the response ends and it can start waiting for the next response.

- Chunked Transfers In case of dynamic content, when the server cannot really find out the Content-Length when the transmission starts, it may start sending the content in pieces (chunk by chunk) and add the Content-Length for each chunk when it is sent. And when all of the chunks are sent i.e. whole transmission has completed, it sends an empty chunk i.e. the one with Content-Length set to zero in order to identify the client that transmission has completed. In order to notify the client about the chunked transfer, server includes the header Transfer-Encoding: chunked

- Unlike HTTP/1.0 which had Basic authentication only, HTTP/1.1 included digest and proxy authentication

- Caching

- Byte Ranges

- Character sets

- Language negotiation

- Client cookies

- Enhanced compression support

- New status codes

- ..and more

HTTP/1.1 was introduced in 1999 and it had been a standard for many years. Although, it improved alot over it's predecessor; with the web changing everyday, it started to show it's age. Loading a web page these days is more resource-intensive than it ever was. A simple webpage these days has to open more than 30 connections. Well HTTP/1.1 has persistent connections, then why so many connections? you say! The reason is, in HTTP/1.1 it can only have one outstanding connection at any moment of time. HTTP/1.1 tried to fix this by introducing pipelining but it didn't completely address the issue because of the head-of-line blocking where a slow or heavy request may block the requests behind and once a request gets stuck in a pipeline, it will have to wait for the next requests to be fulfilled. To overcome these shortcomings of HTTP/1.1, the developers started implementing the workarounds, for example use of spritesheets, encoded images in CSS, single humungous CSS/Javascript files, domain sharding etc.

###### SPDY - 2009

Google went ahead and started experimenting with alternative protocols to make the web faster and improving web security while reducing the latency of web pages.

It was seen that if we keep increasing the bandwidth, the network performance increases in the beginning but a point comes when there is not much of a performance gain. But if you do the same with latency i.e. if we keep dropping the latency, there is a constant performance gain. This was the core idea for performance gain behind SPDY, decrease the latency to increase the network performance.

The features of SPDY included, multiplexing, compression, prioritization, security etc. I am not going to get into the details of SPDY, as you will get the idea when we get into the nitty gritty of HTTP/2 in the next section as I said HTTP/2 is mostly inspired from SPDY.

SPDY didn't really try to replace HTTP; it was a translation layer over HTTP which existed at the application layer and modified the request before sending it over to the wire. It started to become a defacto standards and majority of browsers started implementing it.

In 2015, at Google, they didn't want to have two competing standards and so they decided to merge it into HTTP while giving birth to HTTP/2 and deprecating SPDY.

###### HTTP/2 - 2015

The key features or differences from the old version of HTTP/1.1 include:

- Binary instead of Textual

- Multiplexing - Multiple asynchronous HTTP requests over a single connection

- Header compression using HPACK

- Server Push - Multiple responses for single request

- Request Prioritization

- Security

###### HTTP/3 - 2022

HTTP/3 is the next version of HTTP. HTTP/3 is a QUIC based protocol. QUIC is a transport layer protocol which is built on top of UDP and is designed to be a replacement for TCP. It is a multiplexed, secure, stream-based protocol which is designed to reduce latency and improve performance. It is a successor to TCP and HTTP/2.

QUIC is a multiplexed, secure, stream-based protocol which is designed to reduce latency and improve performance. It is a successor to TCP and HTTP/2.

---

## References

> Detailed explanations
> 
> [HTTP | MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP)
> 
> **Video**
> 
> [HTTP/1 to HTTP/2 to HTTP/3 - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a-sBfyiXysI)
