# Browsers and how they work ?

## Understanding the Architecture of Web Browsers

Browsers are built of FrontEnd and BackEnd. While the FrontEnd ensures how the webpage appears on the browser, the backend handles the requests and is the carrier of information. Its different components work in coordination to deliver a seamless web experience.

#### Components of Web Browser

###### User Interface

This component allows end-users to interact with all visual elements available on the web page. The visual elements include the **address bar, home button, next button,** and all other elements that fetch and display the web page requested by the end-user.

##### Browser Engine

It is a core component of every web browser. The browser engine functions as an intermediary or a bridge between the user interface and the rendering engine. It queries and handles the rendering engine as per the inputs received from the user interface.

##### Rendering Engine

This component is responsible for rendering a specific web page requested by the user on their screen. It interprets HTML and XML documents along with images that are styled or formatted using CSS, and a final layout is generated, which is displayed on the user interface.

**Note**: Every browser has its own unique rendering engine. Rendering engines might also differ for different browser versions.

##### Networking

This component is responsible for managing network calls using standard protocols like HTTP or FTP. It also looks after security issues associated with internet communication.

##### JavaScript Interpreter

It is responsible for parsing and executing the JavaScript code embedded in a website. Once the interpreted results are generated, they are forwarded to the rendering engine for display on the user interface.

##### UI Backend

This component uses the user interface methods of the underlying operating system. It is mainly used for drawing basic widgets (windows and combo boxes).

##### Data Persistence

It is a persistent layer. A web browser needs to store various types of data locally, for example, cookies. As a result, browsers must be compatible with data storage mechanisms such as WebSQL, IndexedDB, FileSystem, etc.

#### Role of Rendering Engine

Once a user requests a particular document, the rendering engine starts fetching the content of the requested document. This is done via the networking layer. The rendering engine starts receiving the content of that specific document in chunks of 8 KBs from the networking layer. After this, the basic flow of the rendering engine begins.

> 1. Parsing HTML to construct the DOM tree
> 
> 2. Rendre tree construction
> 
> 3. Layout of the render tree
> 
> 4. Painting the render tree
> 
> The four basic steps include:
> 
> 1. The requested HTML page is parsed in chunks, including the external CSS files and in style elements, by the rendering engine. The HTML elements are then converted into DOM nodes to form a **“content tree” or “DOM tree.”**
> 2. Simultaneously, the browser also creates a **render tree.** This tree includes both the styling information as well as the visual instructions that define the order in which the elements will be displayed. The render tree ensures that the content is displayed in the desired order.
> 3. Further, the render tree goes through the **layout process.** When a render tree is created, the position or size values are not assigned. The entire process of calculating values for evaluating the desired position is called a layout process. In this process, every node is assigned the exact coordinates. This ensures that every node appears at an accurate position on the screen.
> 4. The final step is to paint the screen, wherein the render tree is traversed, and the renderer’s **paint()** method is invoked, which paints each node on the screen using the UI backend layer.

As discussed earlier, **every browser has its own unique rendering engine.** So naturally, every browser has its own way of interpreting web pages on a user’s screen. Here’s where a challenge arises for web developers regarding the cross-browser compatibility of their website.

By understanding how a rendering engine works, web developers can gain greater insight into how websites operate. Consequently, they can develop, design, and deploy content more efficiently. If one comprehends the nuance of how web content is displayed on a user’s screen by various browsers, one is simply more equipped to create content that is compatible with multiple browsers.

---

## References

> [How browsers work](https://web.dev/howbrowserswork/)
> 
> https://www.browserstack.com/guide/browser-rendering-engine
> 
> [Populating the page: how browsers work - Web performance | MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Performance/How_browsers_work)
