# DNS

**DNS** (Domain Name System) is a hierarchical and decentralized naming system for Internet connected resources. DNS maintains a list of [domain names](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/Domain_name) along with the resources, such as IP addresses, that are associated with them.

The most prominent function of DNS is the translation of human-friendly domain names (such as mozilla.org) to a numeric [IP address](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/IP_Address) (such as 151.106.5.172); this process of mapping a domain name to the appropriate IP address is known as a **DNS lookup**. By contrast, a **reverse DNS lookup** (rDNS) is used to determine the domain name associated with an IP address.



## 4 DNS Servers

1. **DNS recursor:** he recursor can be thought of as a librarian who is asked to go find a particular book somewhere in a library. The DNS recursor is a server designed to receive queries from client machines through applications such as web browsers.

2. **Root nameserver:** The [root server](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/dns/glossary/dns-root-server/) is the first step in translating (resolving) human readable host names into IP addresses. It can be thought of like an index in a library that points to different racks of books - typically it serves as a reference to other more specific locations.

3. **TLD nameserver:** The top level domain server ([TLD](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/dns/top-level-domain/)) can be thought of as a specific rack of books in a library. This nameserver is the next step in the search for a specific IP address, and it hosts the last portion of a hostname (In example.com, the TLD server is “com”).

4. **Authorative nameserver:** This final nameserver can be thought of as a dictionary on a rack of books, in which a specific name can be translated into its definition. The authoritative nameserver is the last stop in the nameserver query. If the authoritative name server has access to the requested record, it will return the IP address for the requested hostname back to the DNS Recursor (the librarian) that made the initial request.



## Steps in DNS Lookup

Flow => Client -> DNS Recursive Resolver -> DNS Root Nameserver -> DNS TLD Nameserver -> Cloudflare.com Authorative Nameserver.

8 steps in a DNS lookup:

1. A user types ‘example.com’ into a web browser and the query travels into the Internet and is received by a DNS recursive resolver.
2. The resolver then queries a DNS root nameserver (.).
3. The root server then responds to the resolver with the address of a Top Level Domain (TLD) DNS server (such as .com or .net), which stores the information for its domains. When searching for example.com, our request is pointed toward the .com TLD.
4. The resolver then makes a request to the .com TLD.
5. The TLD server then responds with the IP address of the domain’s nameserver, example.com.
6. Lastly, the recursive resolver sends a query to the domain’s nameserver.
7. The IP address for example.com is then returned to the resolver from the nameserver.
8. The DNS resolver then responds to the web browser with the IP address of the domain requested initially.

Once the 8 steps of the DNS lookup have returned the IP address for example.com, the browser is able to make the request for the web page:

10. The browser makes a [HTTP](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/ddos/glossary/hypertext-transfer-protocol-http/) request to the IP address.
11. The server at that IP returns the webpage to be rendered in the browser (step 10).



## DNS Resolver

The DNS resolver is the first stop in the DNS lookup, and it is responsible for dealing with the client that made the initial request. The resolver starts the sequence of queries that ultimately leads to a URL being translated into the necessary IP address.

Note: A typical uncached DNS lookup will involve both recursive and iterative queries.

It's important to differentiate between a [recursive DNS](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/dns/what-is-recursive-dns/) query and a recursive DNS resolver. The query refers to the request made to a DNS resolver requiring the resolution of the query. A DNS recursive resolver is the computer that accepts a recursive query and processes the response by making the necessary requests.



## Types of DNS Queries

1. **Recursive query** - In a recursive query, a DNS client requires that a DNS server (typically a DNS recursive resolver) will respond to the client with either the requested resource record or an error message if the resolver can't find the record.
2. **Iterative query** - in this situation the DNS client will allow a DNS server to return the best answer it can. If the queried DNS server does not have a match for the query name, it will return a referral to a DNS server authoritative for a lower level of the domain namespace. The DNS client will then make a query to the referral address. This process continues with additional DNS servers down the query chain until either an error or timeout occurs.
3. **Non-recursive query** - typically this will occur when a DNS resolver client queries a DNS server for a record that it has access to either because it's authoritative for the record or the record exists inside of its cache. Typically, a DNS server will cache DNS records to prevent additional bandwidth consumption and load on upstream servers.

## DNS caching

he purpose of caching is to temporarily stored data in a location that results in improvements in performance and reliability for data requests. DNS caching involves storing data closer to the requesting client so that the DNS query can be resolved earlier and additional queries further down the DNS lookup chain can be avoided, thereby improving load times and reducing bandwidth/CPU consumption. DNS data can be cached in a variety of locations, each of which will store DNS records for a set amount of time determined by a [time-to-live (TTL)](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/cdn/glossary/time-to-live-ttl/).

1. **Browser DNS Caching**
   
   Modern web browsers are designed by default to cache DNS records for a set amount of time. The purpose here is obvious; the closer the DNS caching occurs to the web browser, the fewer processing steps must be taken in order to check the cache and make the correct requests to an IP address. When a request is made for a DNS record, the browser cache is the first location checked for the requested record.
   
   In Chrome, you can see the status of your DNS cache by going to chrome://net-internals/#dns.

2. **Operating System(OS) level DNS caching**
   
   The operating system level DNS resolver is the second and last local stop before a DNS query leaves your machine. The process inside your operating system that is designed to handle this query is commonly called a “stub resolver” or DNS client. When a stub resolver gets a request from an application, it first checks its own cache to see if it has the record. If it does not, it then sends a DNS query (with a recursive flag set), outside the local network to a DNS recursive resolver inside the Internet service provider (ISP).
   
   When the recursive resolver inside the ISP receives a DNS query, like all previous steps, it will also check to see if the requested host-to-IP-address translation is already stored inside its local persistence layer.
   
   The recursive resolver also has additional functionality depending on the types of records it has in its cache:
   
   If the resolver does not have the [A records](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/dns/dns-records/dns-a-record/), but does have the [NS records](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/dns/dns-records/dns-ns-record/) for the authoritative nameservers, it will query those name servers directly, bypassing several steps in the DNS query. This shortcut prevents lookups from the root and .com nameservers (in our search for example.com) and helps the resolution of the DNS query occur more quickly.

3. If the resolver does not have the NS records, it will send a query to the TLD servers (.com in our case), skipping the root server.

4. In the unlikely event that the resolver does not have records pointing to the TLD servers, it will then query the root servers. This event typically occurs after a DNS cache has been purged.

---

## References

> [How DNS works. How to look up authoritative name servers address?](https://howdns.works/ep6/)
> 
> https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/dns/what-is-dns/
> 
> **Domain Name**
> 
> https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/dns/glossary/what-is-a-domain-name/
> 
> [What is a Domain Name? - Learn web development | MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/Web_mechanics/What_is_a_domain_name)
