# Hosting

## What is the difference between webpage, website, web server and search engine?

**Web Page:** A document which can be displayed in a web browser such as Firefox, Google Chrome, Opera, Microsoft Edge, or Apple Safari.

**Web Site:** A collection of web pages which are grouped together and usually connected together in various ways.

**Web Server:** A computer that hosts a website on the Internet.

**Search Engine:** A web service that helps you find other web pages, such as Google, Bing, Yahoo, or DuckDuckGo. Search engines are normally accessed through a web browser.



## Web Server

At the most basic level, whenever a browser needs a file that is hosted on a web server, the browser requests the file via HTTP. When the request reaches the correct (hardware) web server, the (software) *HTTP server* accepts the request, finds the requested document, and sends it back to the browser, also through HTTP.

To publish a website, you need either a static or a dynamic web server.

- **static web server:** consists of a computer (hardware) with an HTTP server (software). We call it "static" because the server sends its hosted files as-is to your browser.

- **dynamic web server** consists of a static web server plus extra software, most commonly an *application server* and a *database*. We call it "dynamic" because the application server updates the hosted files before sending content to your browser via the HTTP server.

For example, to produce the final webpages you see in the browser, the application server might fill an HTML template with content from a database. Sites like MDN or Wikipedia have thousands of webpages. Typically, these kinds of sites are composed of only a few HTML templates and a giant database, rather than thousands of static HTML documents. This setup makes it easier to maintain and deliver the content.



## Hosting Files

First, a web server has to store the website's files, namely all HTML documents and their related assets, including images, CSS stylesheets, JavaScript files, fonts, and video.

Technically, you could host all those files on your own computer, but it's far more convenient to store files all on a dedicated web server because:

- A dedicated web server is typically more available (up and running).
- Excluding downtime and system troubles, a dedicated web server is always connected to the Internet.
- A dedicated web server can have the same IP address all the time. This is known as a *dedicated IP address*. (Not all [ISPs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/ISP) provide a fixed IP address for home lines.)
- A dedicated web server is typically maintained by a third party.

For all these reasons, finding a good hosting provider is a key part of building your website. Examine the various services companies offer. Choose one that fits your needs and budget. (Services range from free to thousands of dollars per month.) You can find more details [in this article](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/Tools_and_setup/How_much_does_it_cost#hosting).

## References

> [Different Types of Web Hosting Explained! | Shared Hosting vs. VPS Hosting vs. Dedicated Server - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AXVZYzw8geg)
> 
> [Where to Host a Fullstack Project on a Budget - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kx_1NYYJS7Q)[Where to Host a Fullstack Project on a Budget - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kx_1NYYJS7Q)
> 
> [What is a web server? - Learn web development | MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Common_questions/Web_mechanics/What_is_a_web_server)
